.\" dummy line
.TH GNUPLOT 1 " 7 October 2008"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
gnuplot \- an interactive plotting program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gnuplot
[X11 options] [options] [file ...]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Gnuplot
is a command-driven interactive function plotting program.
.PP
If file names are given on the command line,
gnuplot
loads each file with the
.B load
command, in the order specified, and exits after the last file is
processed.  If no files are given, \fBgnuplot\fP prompts for
interactive commands.
.PP
Here are some of its features:
.PP
Plots any number of functions, built up of C operators, C library
functions, and some things C doesn't have like **, sgn(), etc.  
.PP
User-defined constants and functions.
.PP
All computations performed in the complex domain.  Just the real part is
plotted by default, but functions like imag() and abs() and arg() are
available to override this.
.PP
Also support for plotting data files, to compare actual data to
theoretical curves.
.PP
Nonlinear least-squares fitting.
.PP
2D plots with mouse-controlled zooming.
.PP
3D plots with mouse-controlled point of view.
.PP
User-defined X and Y ranges (optional auto-ranging), smart axes scaling,
smart tic marks.
.PP
Labelling of X and Y axes.
.PP
Shell escapes and command line substitution.
.PP
Load and save capability.
.PP
Support for many output devices and file formats.
.PP
Output redirection.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
\fB\-p, --persist\fP lets plot windows survive after main gnuplot program exits.
.PP
\fB\-e "command list"\fP executes the requested commands before loading the next input file.
.PP
\fB\-h, --help\fP print summary of usage
.PP
\fB\-V\fP show current version
.SH X11 OPTIONS
.B Gnuplot
provides the \fIx11\fP terminal type for use
with X servers. This terminal type is set automatically at startup if
the \fBDISPLAY\fR environment variable is set, if the \fBTERM\fR environment
variable is set to \fBxterm\fR, or if the \fB\-display\fR command line
option is used.
For terminal type \fIx11\fR, \fIgnuplot\fP
accepts the standard X Toolkit options and resources such as geometry, font,
and background. See the X(1) man page for a description of
the options.
In addition to the X Toolkit options:
.PP
\fB\-clear\fP requests that the window be cleared momentarily before a
new plot is displayed.
.PP
\fB\-gray\fP requests grayscale rendering on grayscale or color displays.
(Grayscale displays receive monochrome rendering by default.)
.PP
\fB\-mono\fP forces monochrome rendering on color displays.
.PP
\fB-raise\fP raises the plot window after each plot.
.PP
\fB-noraise\fP does not raise the plot window after each plot.
.PP
\fB\-tvtwm\fP requests that geometry specifications
for position of the window be made relative to the currently displayed
portion of the virtual root.
.PP
These options may also be controlled with resources in your \fB.Xdefaults\fR
file.
For example: \fBgnuplot*gray: on\fP .
.PP
\fIGnuplot\fP provides a command line option (\fB\-pointsize \fIv\fR) and
a resource (\fBgnuplot*pointsize: \fIv\fR) to control the size of points
plotted with the "points" plotting style. The value \fIv\fR is a real
number (greater than 0 and less than or equal to ten) used as a
scaling factor for point sizes. For example, \fB\-pointsize 2\fR uses
points twice the default size, and \fB\-pointsize 0.5\fR uses points
half the normal size.
.PP
For monochrome displays, \fIgnuplot\fR does not honor foreground or
background colors. The default is black-on-white. \fB\-rv\fP or
\fBgnuplot*reverseVideo: on\fP requests white-on-black.
.PP
For color displays \fIgnuplot\fP honors
the following resources (shown here with default values). The values
may be color names in the X11 \fIrgb.txt\fP file on your system, hexadecimal
RGB color specifications (see X11 documentation), or a color name
followed by a comma and an \fIintensity\fR value from 0 to 1. For example,
\fBblue,.5\fR means a half intensity blue.
.sp
.B  "gnuplot*background: white"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*textColor: black"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*borderColor: black"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*axisColor: black"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line1Color: red"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line2Color: green"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line3Color: blue"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line4Color: magenta"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line5Color: cyan"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line6Color: sienna"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line7Color: orange"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line8Color: coral"
.br

When \fB\-gray\fP is selected, \fIgnuplot\fP honors
the following resources for grayscale or color displays (shown here with
default values). Note that the default background is black.
.sp
.B  "gnuplot*background: black"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*textGray: white"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*borderGray: gray50"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*axisGray: gray50"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line1Gray: gray100"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line2Gray: gray60"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line3Gray: gray80"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line4Gray: gray40"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line5Gray: gray90"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line6Gray: gray50"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line7Gray: gray70"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line8Gray: gray30"
.br

\fIGnuplot\fP honors the following resources for setting the width in
pixels of plot lines (shown here with default values.) 0 or 1 means
a minimal width line of 1 pixel width. A value of 2 or 3 may
improve the  appearance of some plots.
.sp
.br
.B  "gnuplot*borderWidth: 2"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*axisWidth: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line1Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line2Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line3Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line4Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line5Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line6Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line7Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line8Width: 0"
.br

\fIGnuplot\fP honors the following resources for setting the dash style
used for plotting lines.  0 means a solid line. A 2 digit number \fIjk\fR
(\fIj\fP and \fIk\fP are >= 1  and <= 9) means a dashed line with a
repeated pattern of \fIj\fR pixels on followed by \fIk\fR pixels off.
For example, '16' is a "dotted" line with 1 pixel on followed by 6 pixels
off.  More elaborate on/off patterns can be specified with a 4 digit value.
For example, '4441' is 4 on, 4 off, 4 on, 1 off. The default values shown
below are for monochrome displays or monochrome rendering on color or
grayscale displays. For color displays, the defaults for all are 0
(solid line) except for \fBaxisDashes\fR which defaults to a '16' dotted
line.
.sp
.br
.B  "gnuplot*borderDashes: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*axisDashes: 16"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line1Dashes: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line2Dashes: 42"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line3Dashes: 13"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line4Dashes: 44"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line5Dashes: 15"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line6Dashes: 4441"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line7Dashes: 42"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line8Dashes: 13"
.br
.PP
The size or aspect ratio of a plot may be changed by resizing the
.I gnuplot
window.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
A number of shell environment variables are understood by
gnuplot.  None of these are required.
.TP
.B GNUTERM
The name of the terminal type to be used.  This overrides any terminal
type sensed by gnuplot on start-up, but is itself overridden by the
.gnuplot (or equivalent) start-up file (see \fBFILES\fP and "help
start-up") and, of course, by later explicit changes.
.TP
.B GNUHELP 
The pathname of the HELP file (gnuplot.gih).
.TP
.B HOME
The name of a directory to search for a .gnuplot file if none is found
in the current directory.
.TP
.B PAGER
An output filter for help messages.
.TP
.B SHELL
The program used for the "shell" command.
.TP
.B FIT_SCRIPT
Specifies a gnuplot command to be executed when a
fit is interrupted---see "help fit".  
.TP
.B FIT_LOG
The name of the logfile maintained by fit.
.TP
.B GNUPLOT_LIB
Additional search directories for data and command files. The variable
may contain a single directory name, or a list of directories
separated by ':'. The contents of GNUPLOT_LIB are appended to the
"loadpath" variable, but not saved with the "save" and "save set"
commands.
.TP
.B GDFONTPATH
Several gnuplot terminal drivers access TrueType fonts via the gd library.
This variable gives the font search path for these drivers.
.TP
.B GNUPLOT_DEFAULT_GDFONT
The default font for the terminal drivers that access TrueType fonts
via the gd library.
.TP
.B GNUPLOT_FONTPATH
The font search path used by the postscript terminal. The format is
the same as for GNUPLOT_LIB. The contents of GNUPLOT_FONTPATH are
appended to the "fontpath" variable, but not saved with the "save" and
"save set" commands.
.TP
.B GNUPLOT_PS_DIR
Used by the postscript driver to locate external prologue
files. Depending on the build process, gnuplot contains either a
builtin copy of those files or simply a default hardcoded path. Use
this variable to test the postscript terminal with custom prologue
files. See "help postscript prologue".
.SH FILES
.TP
.I .gnuplot
Gnuplot looks for this initialization file, first in the current
directory, then in the HOME directory.  It may contain any legal
gnuplot commands, but typically they are limited to setting the
terminal and defining frequently-used functions or variables.
.TP 
.I fit.log
The default name of the logfile maintained by fit.
.SH AUTHORS
Thomas Williams, Pixar Corporation,
.br
(gnuplot-info@lists.sourceforge.net)
.br
and Colin Kelley.
.PP
Additions for labelling by Russell Lang, Monash University, Australia.
.br
(rjl@monu1.cc.monash.edu.au)
.br
Further additions by David Kotz, Dartmouth College, New Hampshire, USA
(formerly of Duke University, North Carolina, USA).
.br
(David.Kotz@Dartmouth.edu)
.SH BUGS
See the
.I help bugs
command in gnuplot.
.SH SEE ALSO
See the printed manual or the on-line help for details on specific commands.
.br
X(1).
