.\" dummy line
.\" $Id: gnuplot-ja.1,v 1.3 2009-03-09 20:21:36+09 shige Exp $
.\" 日本語訳: Shigeharu TAKENO <shige@iee.niit.ac.jp>
.\"
.\" .TH GNUPLOT 1 " 7 October 2008"
.TH GNUPLOT 1 " 2008 年 10 月 7 日"
.UC 4
.\" .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\" gnuplot \- an interactive plotting program
gnuplot \- 対話型グラフ描画プログラム
.\" .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 形式
.B gnuplot
[X11 options] [options] [file ...]
.br
.\" .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 機能説明
.\" .B Gnuplot
.\" is a command-driven interactive function plotting program.
.B Gnuplot
は、コマンド入力方式の対話的な関数描画プログラムです。
.PP
.\" If file names are given on the command line,
.\" gnuplot
.\" loads each file with the
.\" .B load
.\" command, in the order specified, and exits after the last file is
.\" processed.  If no files are given, \fBgnuplot\fP prompts for
.\" interactive commands.
コマンドラインから複数のファイル名を与えると、
gnuplot は各ファイルを指定した順番に
.B load
コマンドで読み込み、最後のファイルを実行した後に終了します。
ファイルを指定しなかった場合は、
\fBgnuplot\fP は対話型コマンドの入力を促します。
.PP
.\" Here are some of its features:
gnuplot は以下のような特徴を持ちます:
.PP
.\" Plots any number of functions, built up of C operators, C library
.\" functions, and some things C doesn't have like **, sgn(), etc.  
C の演算子や C のライブラリ関数、
そして ** や sgn() などのように C にはないようなものを用いて表現された
任意個数の関数の描画。
.PP
.\" User-defined constants and functions.
ユーザ定義定数、ユーザ定義関数。
.PP
.\" All computations performed in the complex domain.  Just the real part is
.\" plotted by default, but functions like imag() and abs() and arg() are
.\" available to override this.
複素数の範囲でのすべての計算。デフォルトでは実数部分のみが描画されますが、
これを変更するために imag() や abs(), arg() のような関数が用意されています。
.PP
.\" Also support for plotting data files, to compare actual data to
.\" theoretical curves.
データファイルの描画のサポート。
理論的な曲線と実際のデータを比較するために使えます。
.PP
.\" Nonlinear least-squares fitting.
非線形の最小二乗法。
.PP
.\" 2D plots with mouse-controlled zooming.
2 次元描画とマウスによる拡大制御。
.PP
.\" 3D plots with mouse-controlled point of view.
3 次元描画とマウスによる視点制御。
.PP
.\" User-defined X and Y ranges (optional auto-ranging), smart axes scaling,
.\" smart tic marks.
X と Y の範囲のユーザ制御 (自動設定に対するオプション)、
自動的な軸の縮尺、自動的な軸の刻み。
.PP
.\" Labelling of X and Y axes.
X と Y の軸の見出し付け。
.PP
.\" Shell escapes and command line substitution.
シェルコマンドの実行とコマンドライン置換。
.PP
.\" Load and save capability.
load と save。
.PP
.\" Support for many output devices and file formats.
多くの出力デバイス、出力ファイル形式のサポート。
.PP
.\" Output redirection.
出力リダイレクト。
.\" .SH OPTIONS
.SH オプション
.PP
.\" \fB\-p, --persist\fP lets plot windows survive after main gnuplot program exits.
\fB\-p, --persist\fP は、
gnuplot プログラムが終了した後も描画ウィンドウを残します。
.PP
.\" \fB\-e "command list"\fP executes the requested commands before loading the next input file.
\fB\-e "command list"\fP は、
次の入力ファイルを読み込む前に指定したコマンドを実行します。
.PP
.\" \fB\-h, --help\fP print summary of usage
\fB\-h, --help\fP は、使用法の要約を表示します。
.PP
.\" \fB\-V\fP show current version
\fB\-V\fP は、現在のバージョンを表示します。
.\" .SH X11 OPTIONS
.SH X11 オプション
.\" .B Gnuplot
.\" provides the \fIx11\fP terminal type for use
.\" with X servers. This terminal type is set automatically at startup if
.\" the \fBDISPLAY\fR environment variable is set, if the \fBTERM\fR environment
.\" variable is set to \fBxterm\fR, or if the \fB\-display\fR command line
.\" option is used.
.B gnuplot
は、X サーバでの使用のために \fIx11\fP 出力形式を提供しています。
\fBDISPLAY\fR 環境変数が設定されているか、
\fBTERM\fR 環境変数が \fBxterm\fR と設定されているか、
コマンドラインオプション \fB\-display\fR を使用した場合は、
起動時に自動的にこの出力形式が設定されます。
.\" For terminal type \fIx11\fR, \fIgnuplot\fP
.\" accepts the standard X Toolkit options and resources such as geometry, font,
.\" and background. See the X(1) man page for a description of
.\" the options.
\fIx11\fR 出力形式に関しては、\fIgnuplot\fP は geometry やフォント、
背景色 (background) などの通常の X Toolkit オプションやリソースの指定を
受けつけます。
それらのオプションについては X(1) マニュアルページを参照してください。
.\" In addition to the X Toolkit options:
X Toolkit オプションに加え、以下のものが使用できます:
.PP
.\" \fB\-clear\fP requests that the window be cleared momentarily before a
.\" new plot is displayed.
\fB\-clear\fP 新しい描画を表示する前に (瞬間的に) 画面を消去
.PP
.\" \fB\-gray\fP requests grayscale rendering on grayscale or color displays.
.\" (Grayscale displays receive monochrome rendering by default.)
\fB\-gray\fP グレイスケールまたはカラーディスプレイ上でのグレイスケール描画
(デフォルトではグレイスケールディスプレイは白黒描画を受け付ける)
.PP
.\" \fB\-mono\fP forces monochrome rendering on color displays.
\fB\-mono\fP カラーディスプレイ上で強制的に白黒描画
.PP
.\" \fB-raise\fP raises the plot window after each plot.
\fB-raise\fP 各描画後に描画ウィンドウを最前面へ出す
.PP
.\" \fB-noraise\fP does not raise the plot window after each plot.
\fB-noraise\fP 各描画後に描画ウィンドウを最前面へ出すことはしない
.PP
.\" \fB\-tvtwm\fP requests that geometry specifications
.\" for position of the window be made relative to the currently displayed
.\" portion of the virtual root.
\fB\-tvtwm\fP geometry オプションによる位置の指定を、
仮想ルートウィンドウ中の現在の表示部分に対する相対的な位置にする
.PP
.\" These options may also be controlled with resources in your \fB.Xdefaults\fR
.\" file.
.\" For example: \fBgnuplot*gray: on\fP .
これらのオプションは、ユーザの \fB.Xdefaults\fR ファイル内の
リソースでも指定できます。
.PP
.\" \fIGnuplot\fP provides a command line option (\fB\-pointsize \fIv\fR) and
.\" a resource (\fBgnuplot*pointsize: \fIv\fR) to control the size of points
.\" plotted with the "points" plotting style. The value \fIv\fR is a real
.\" number (greater than 0 and less than or equal to ten) used as a
.\" scaling factor for point sizes. For example, \fB\-pointsize 2\fR uses
.\" points twice the default size, and \fB\-pointsize 0.5\fR uses points
.\" half the normal size.
\fIgnuplot\fP は描画スタイル "points" で描画する点のサイズの制御にも、
コマンドラインオプション (\fB\-pointsize \fIv\fR) と
リソース (\fBgnuplot*pointsize: \fIv\fR) を提供しています。
値 \fIv\fR は点のサイズの拡大率として使われる (正で 10 以下の) 実数値 で、
例えば \fB\-pointsize 2\fR はデフォルトのサイズの 2 倍、
\fB\-pointsize 0.5\fR は普通のサイズの半分の点が使われます。
.PP
.\" For monochrome displays, \fIgnuplot\fR does not honor foreground or
.\" background colors. The default is black-on-white. \fB\-rv\fP or
.\" \fBgnuplot*reverseVideo: on\fP requests white-on-black.
白黒ディスプレイに対しては、\fIgnuplot\fR は描画色 (foreground) も
背景色 (background) も与えません。デフォルトでは背景は白、描画は黒です。
\fB\-rv\fR や \fBgnuplot*reverseVideo: on\fP の場合には
背景が黒で描画は白になります。
.PP
.\" For color displays \fIgnuplot\fP honors
.\" the following resources (shown here with default values). The values
.\" may be color names in the X11 \fIrgb.txt\fP file on your system, hexadecimal
.\" RGB color specifications (see X11 documentation), or a color name
.\" followed by a comma and an \fIintensity\fR value from 0 to 1. For example,
.\" \fBblue,.5\fR means a half intensity blue.
カラーディスプレイに対しては、\fIgnuplot\fP は以下のリソース 
(ここではそのデフォルトの値を示します) を参照します。
リソースの値は、システム上の X11 \fIrgb.txt\fP ファイルに書かれている色名、
または 16 進の色指定 (X11 のマニュアルを参照) か、
色名と \fI強度\fR (0 から 1 の間の値) をコンマで区切った値を使用できます。
例えば \fBblue,.5\fR は、半分の強度の青を意味します。
.sp
.B  "gnuplot*background: white"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*textColor: black"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*borderColor: black"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*axisColor: black"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line1Color: red"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line2Color: green"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line3Color: blue"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line4Color: magenta"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line5Color: cyan"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line6Color: sienna"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line7Color: orange"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line8Color: coral"
.br

.\" When \fB\-gray\fP is selected, \fIgnuplot\fP honors
.\" the following resources for grayscale or color displays (shown here with
.\" default values). Note that the default background is black.
\fB\-gray\fP を選択すると、\fIgnuplot\fP は、
グレイスケールまたはカラーディスプレイに対して、以下のリソースを参照します
(ここではそのデフォルトの値を示します)。
デフォルトの背景色は黒であることに注意してください。
.sp
.B  "gnuplot*background: black"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*textGray: white"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*borderGray: gray50"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*axisGray: gray50"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line1Gray: gray100"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line2Gray: gray60"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line3Gray: gray80"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line4Gray: gray40"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line5Gray: gray90"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line6Gray: gray50"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line7Gray: gray70"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line8Gray: gray30"
.br

.\" \fIGnuplot\fP honors the following resources for setting the width in
.\" pixels of plot lines (shown here with default values.) 0 or 1 means
.\" a minimal width line of 1 pixel width. A value of 2 or 3 may
.\" improve the  appearance of some plots.
\Ignuplot\fP は描画の線の幅 (ピクセル単位) の設定のために
以下のリソースを参照します (ここではそのデフォルトの値を示します)。
0 または 1 は最小の線幅の 1 ピクセル幅を意味します。
2 または 3 の値によってグラフの外観を改善できる場合もあるでしょう。
.sp
.br
.B  "gnuplot*borderWidth: 2"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*axisWidth: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line1Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line2Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line3Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line4Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line5Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line6Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line7Width: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line8Width: 0"
.br

.\" \fIGnuplot\fP honors the following resources for setting the dash style
.\" used for plotting lines.  0 means a solid line. A 2 digit number \fIjk\fR
.\" (\fIj\fP and \fIk\fP are >= 1  and <= 9) means a dashed line with a
.\" repeated pattern of \fIj\fR pixels on followed by \fIk\fR pixels off.
.\" For example, '16' is a "dotted" line with 1 pixel on followed by 6 pixels
.\" off.  More elaborate on/off patterns can be specified with a 4 digit value.
.\" For example, '4441' is 4 on, 4 off, 4 on, 1 off. The default values shown
.\" below are for monochrome displays or monochrome rendering on color or
.\" grayscale displays. For color displays, the defaults for all are 0
.\" (solid line) except for \fBaxisDashes\fR which defaults to a '16' dotted
.\" line.
\fIgnuplot\fP は線描画で使用する点線の形式の設定用に
以下のリソースを参照します。0 は実線を意味します。
2 桁の 10 進数 \fIjk\fR (\fIj\fP と \fIk\fP は 1 から 9 までの値) は、
\fIj\fR 個のピクセルの描画に \fIk\fR 個の空白のピクセルが続く
パターンの繰り返しからなる点線を意味します。例えば '16' は、
1 個のピクセルの後に 6 つの空白が続くパターンの点線になります。さらに、
4 桁の 10 進数でより詳細なピクセルと空白の列のパターンを指定できます。
例えば、'4441' は 4 つのピクセル、4 つの空白、4 つのピクセル、1 つの空白の
パターンを意味します。以下のデフォルトのリソース値は、白黒ディスプレイ、
あるいはカラーや白黒階調 (grayscale) ディスプレイ上の白黒描画における
値です。カラーディスプレイでは、\fBaxisDashes\fR のデフォルト値のみが '16'
の点線で、それ以外のデフォルト値はすべて 0 (実線) です。
.sp
.br
.B  "gnuplot*borderDashes: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*axisDashes: 16"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line1Dashes: 0"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line2Dashes: 42"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line3Dashes: 13"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line4Dashes: 44"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line5Dashes: 15"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line6Dashes: 4441"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line7Dashes: 42"
.br
.B  "gnuplot*line8Dashes: 13"
.br
.PP
.\" The size or aspect ratio of a plot may be changed by resizing the
.\" .I gnuplot
.\" window.
描画サイズとアスペクト比は、
.I gnuplot
のウィンドウをリサイズすることで変更できます。
.\" .SH ENVIRONMENT
.SH 環境変数
.\" A number of shell environment variables are understood by
.\" gnuplot.  None of these are required.
gnuplot は多くのシェル環境変数を認識します。必須のものはありません。
.TP
.B GNUTERM
.\" The name of the terminal type to be used.  This overrides any terminal
.\" type sensed by gnuplot on start-up, but is itself overridden by the
.\" .gnuplot (or equivalent) start-up file (see \fBFILES\fP and "help
.\" start-up") and, of course, by later explicit changes.
使用される出力形式 (terminal) の名前。
これは gnuplot が起動時に見つけた出力形式に優先して使用されますが、.gnuplot 
(またはそれに相当する) スタートアップファイル (「ファイル」のセクション、
または "help start-up" 参照) による指定や、当り前のことですが、
その後に明示的に指定した物の方が優先されます。
.TP
.B GNUHELP 
.\" The pathname of the HELP file (gnuplot.gih).
ヘルプファイル (gnuplot.gih) のパス名。
.TP
.B HOME
.\" The name of a directory to search for a .gnuplot file if none is found
.\" in the current directory.
カレントディレクトリに .gnuplot というファイルがない場合に
そのファイルを検索するディレクトリ。
.TP
.B PAGER
.\" An output filter for help messages.
ヘルプメッセージの出力用のフィルタ。
.TP
.B SHELL
.\" The program used for the "shell" command.
"shell" コマンドの際に使われるプログラム。
.TP
.B FIT_SCRIPT
.\" Specifies a gnuplot command to be executed when a
.\" fit is interrupted---see "help fit".  
当てはめ (fit) が中断されたときに実行する gnuplot コマンドの指定
("help fit" 参照)。
.TP
.B FIT_LOG
.\" The name of the logfile maintained by fit.
当てはめ (fit) の使用するログファイルの名前。
.TP
.B GNUPLOT_LIB
.\" Additional search directories for data and command files. The variable
.\" may contain a single directory name, or a list of directories
.\" separated by ':'. The contents of GNUPLOT_LIB are appended to the
.\" "loadpath" variable, but not saved with the "save" and "save set"
.\" commands.
データやコマンドファイルの検索ディレクトリの追加定義。その変数は、
一つのディレクトリ名か、または ':' 区切りで複数のディレクトリ名を
つなげて書いたものです。GNUPLOT_LIB の値は変数 "loadpath" に追加されますが、
それは "save" や "save set" コマンドでは保存されません。
.TP
.B GDFONTPATH
.\" Several gnuplot terminal drivers access TrueType fonts via the gd library.
.\" This variable gives the font search path for these drivers.
出力形式の中には gd ライブラリ経由で TrueType フォントを扱えるものが
いくつかあります。この変数はそれらの出力形式に対するフォントの
検索パスを与えます。
.TP
.B GNUPLOT_DEFAULT_GDFONT
.\" The default font for the terminal drivers that access TrueType fonts
.\" via the gd library.
gd ライブラリ経由で TrueType フォントを扱う出力形式のデフォルトフォント。
.TP
.B GNUPLOT_FONTPATH
.\" The font search path used by the postscript terminal. The format is
.\" the same as for GNUPLOT_LIB. The contents of GNUPLOT_FONTPATH are
.\" appended to the "fontpath" variable, but not saved with the "save" and
.\" "save set" commands.
postscript 出力形式が使用するフォント検索パス。
書式は GNUPLOT_LIB と同じです。
GNUPLOT_FONTPATH の値は変数 "fontpath" に追加されますが、
それは "save" や "save set" コマンドでは保存されません。
.TP
.B GNUPLOT_PS_DIR
.\" Used by the postscript driver to locate external prologue
.\" files. Depending on the build process, gnuplot contains either a
.\" builtin copy of those files or simply a default hardcoded path. Use
.\" this variable to test the postscript terminal with custom prologue
.\" files. See "help postscript prologue".
postscript 出力形式が探す外部 (prologue) 定義ファイルの置き場所。
インストール時の作業により、gnuplot にはそれらのファイルのコピーが
組み込まれているか、または単にそれらのファイルのあるデフォルトのパスが
埋め込まれるかが変わります。カスタマイズした定義ファイルで postscript 出力を
テストする場合は、この環境変数を使ってください。"help postscript prologue" 
参照。
.\" .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.I .gnuplot
.\" Gnuplot looks for this initialization file, first in the current
.\" directory, then in the HOME directory.  It may contain any legal
.\" gnuplot commands, but typically they are limited to setting the
.\" terminal and defining frequently-used functions or variables.
gnuplot はこの初期化ファイルを、最初はカレントディレクトリを、
その後でホームディレクトリを探します。ここには、
任意の正しい gnuplot コマンドを書くことが可能ですが、一般的には、
出力装置の指定や、よく使う関数や変数の定義を設定する程度に抑えておきます。
.TP 
.I fit.log
.\" The default name of the logfile maintained by fit.
当てはめ (fit) の使用するログファイルのデフォルトの名前。
.\" .SH AUTHORS
.SH 作者
.\" Thomas Williams, Pixar Corporation,
Thomas Williams (Pixar Corporation)
.br
(gnuplot-info@lists.sourceforge.net)
.br
.\" and Colin Kelley.
および Colin Kelley。
.PP
.\" Additions for labelling by Russell Lang, Monash University, Australia.
ラベル付けの追加: Russell Lang (Monash University, Australia)
.br
(rjl@monu1.cc.monash.edu.au)
.br
.\" Further additions by David Kotz, Dartmouth College, New Hampshire, USA
.\" (formerly of Duke University, North Carolina, USA).
さらなる追加: David Kotz (Dartmouth College, New Hampshire, USA; 
(前の所属は Duke University, North Carolina, USA)
.br
(David.Kotz@Dartmouth.edu)
.\" .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\" See the
.\" .I help bugs
.\" command in gnuplot.
gnuplot のコマンド
.I help bugs
を参照。
.\" .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 参照
.\" See the printed manual or the on-line help for details on specific commands.
個々のコマンドの詳細については、印刷されたマニュアルやオンラインヘルプを参照。
.br
.\" X(1).
X(1) 参照。
