.TH LASERGNU l 
.SH NAME
lasergnu \- send gnuplot output to a printer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lasergnu
[ flags ] plot-command...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I lasergnu
runs
.IR gnuplot (1)
in an environment to produce typeset output on an IMAGEN  or
Postscript printer.
.PP
The 
.B gnuplot
commands
.B plot-command
are performed and the output sent to the printer. 
If the 
.B -f
option specifies a file for input, the plot command is optional. 
The command-line plot commands are executed prior to any in the
file(s).
.PP
For example, to plot the function
.I sin(x)
from -1 to +1, and to use printer im1, use the command
.br
.nf
    lasergnu -Pim1 'plot [-1:1] sin(x) with lines'
.fi
To execute the gnuplot command file
.I myplot,
on the postscript printer lw0, use the command
.br
.nf
    lasergnu -Plw0 -p -f myplot
.fi
The following switches are recognized:
.TP
.BI \-p
Use the postscript language to make the plot, instead of Impress.
This is for use on Postscript printers only. This uses a double-size
plot in landscape mode as the default.
.TP
.BI \-P\0 printer
The output of this program is intended for 
.I printer.
\ If the file is being spooled, this determines the printer it is spooled
to (default: $LASER).
Be sure to use the -p flag if the printer is a postscript printer.
.TP
.BI \-f\0 file
Take gnuplot commands from the named file.
Multiple files  may be supplied with separate -f options.
.TP
.BI  \-t\0 title
Specify the title of the plot.
.TP
.BI \-b
Do not print a banner page.
.TP
.BI \-J
Do not print a banner page.
.TP
.B \-help
Prints a list of options.
.SH SEE ALSO
gnuplot(l), lpr(1)
